
esptools
========

Version 20090108dev

esptools includes software which juhana at BGSForums has used
in decoding the esm/esp file format. The tool "espparser"
reads the complete esm/esp file and prints its content in
a human readable format. libespparser is a start of the same
but user should be able to skip records and parse only the
records needed.

Program compiles in Linux with "make".

Usage:
espparser Fallout3.esm
espparser Mod.esp

The document NOTES_FESPTEST includes the decoding notes,
but not all are documented there. Also, NOTES_FESPTEST
has docs which are not in the source codes, like list of
value choices, list of condition functions, etc.

I'm going to write a separate format document soon.

Note that Fallout 3 work is based on my Oblivion work, see
the doc NOTES_ESPTEST for that. That doc include more
condition functions.

My decoding work includes the records:

CLMT
CSTY
EFSH
GRAS
IDLE
LSCR
LTEX
PGRD
RACE
REGN
ROAD
SBSP
TREE
WATR
WRLD
WTHR

And all new records in Fallout 3.

I have not yet fully decoded LAND, NAVI, and NAVM records.
CREA of Fallout 3 needs to be verified and updated from
Oblivion.

 ---*---

While I decoded a few unknown records and added to numerous
other records, my work would have not been done without
existing work, mainly UESP Wiki.

When I first time checked at Oblivion data formats, I had
no experience in decoding. Now, while still not being at level
of most skilled decoders, I have decoded Oblivion and also
other game file formats.

The work amount involved here can be better understood by these
numbers: 3708 screenshots for Oblivion TES CS, 4419 screenshots
for FO3 GECK, 247 test esps for TES CS, 980 test esps for
FO3 GECK.

  
Thanks goes to:

UESP Wiki's TES4 format documentation.

Timeslip for his landscape heightmap data source codes.
(I only know how to calculate the heights, not how to
assign the texture coordinates.)

ScripterRon (BGSForums) for his source codes.
(Though, I have used less all the source codes I have.
However, I appreciate very much the open source software.)

ElminsterEU / TES4Edit Lite source code

TES4Gecko team / TES4Gecko source code
 Created by TeamGecko
 - Original TES4 Plugin Utility code: ScripterRon (Ron Hoffman)
 - Gecko plugin splitter and compare code: KomodoDave (N David Brown)
 - Gecko project leader: dev_akm (Aubrey K McAuley)

Lord_Gannondorf for Oblivion Mod Maker's Manual.

 ---*---

FUTURE:

Open source editor prior TES V appears. But FaceGen, SpeedTree,
and procedural textures (see Gamebryo news) will be hard to have.
Partial editor would be useful in any case.

BSA unpacker within the editor: open file dialogs (which require
NIF or DDS files) does not provide a way to open NIF and DDS
files from BSA files.

Complete engine clone. Instead of writing separate OBSE
and graphics extenders, we would be able to add features to
the engine directly. I keep mentioning ScummVM engine clone
as they have succeeded well, both technically and legally.

